---
layout: post
title: Iris Lab
subtitle: 1.4
tags: [homework]
comments: true
---

## Findings

I analyzed a [dataset](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Iris) containing the measurements of four anatomical traits (namely, sepal length, sepal width, petal length, and petal width) for 150 irises across three species (namely, _Iris setosa_, _Iris versicolor_, _Iris virginica_).

I found that the _Iris setosa_ species had, on average, the widest sepals. Iris virginica had the longest average petal length.

## Methodology

### Overview

In completing this lab, I wanted to code a system with functions configured such that I could take any average of any measurement of any species simply by changing parameters in my main method.

For instance, if should I want to compare average petal widths instead of petal lengths, I would simply have to add `petal-lengths = {}` somewhere to create a dictionary (for comparison purposes) and change this line of code:

~~~python
highest_average(petal_widths, "petal-width", True, False))
~~~

to this:

~~~python
highest_average(petal-lengths, "petal-length", True, False))
~~~

in order to print the greatest average petal-length.

The coding itself was more or less straightforward. The only challenges I encountered were syntactical and organizational errors. When fixing the latter, I commented all of my code and renamed every variable to something short that explains its function. I worked entirely on my own on this project (with the exception of troubleshooting help from Mr. Lee). If I were to do this again, I would comment my code early on before I forget what exactly my methods do. While I initially thought that I would code just to answer the two questions, I decided to make a system that could solve any variety of similar problems with a few keystrokes. While I originally feared that this approach would a lot of time, I learned that I was wrong—in fact, I think that I _saved_ time by doing it, not to mention that I learned more by making my code abstract and versatile.

### Code

Over the course of working on this project, I broke up larger methods into smaller parts to aid flexibility. For instance, I used to combine the method that found the highest average of a specific trait and the method that printed that into the same method. Now, however, the highest value can be returned and/or printed, which can be easily selected depending on the task.

My code has two sections: data organization, data analysis, and simple tasks.

***In data organization, I:***

- **Imported the CSV library.**

This is for reading the CSV format which the data is in.

- **Set global dictionaries and lists.**

I made empty dictionaries for each of the traits in the final average trait calculation as well as empty list for every species (and a list of every list of species).

~~~python
sepal_lengths = {} #DICTIONARIES FOR COMPARISON
sepal_widths = {}
petal_lengths = {}
petal_widths = {}

Iris_setosa = [] #SPECIES LIST
Iris_versicolor = []
Iris_virginica = []

all_species = [Iris_setosa, Iris_versicolor, Iris_virginica]
~~~

- **Populated species lists.** I populated each of the above species lists with individual organisms (each of which is a dictionary of traits and values) of that species. While I do not have to keep "individual" dictionaries together in order to complete the task, this can be used if I were to compare correlations between the size of different anatomical features in the future or something of that sort.

~~~python
def populate_species(data):
    for individual in data: #data is a list of dictionaries, row is a dictionary; cicling through each dictionary at a time
        if individual["species"] == "Iris-setosa": #sorting by species
            Iris_setosa.append(individual) #adding row to list
        elif individual["species"] == "Iris-versicolor":
            Iris_versicolor.append(individual) #adding row to list
        elif individual["species"] == "Iris-virginica":
            Iris_virginica.append(individual) #adding row to list
~~~

***In data analysis, I:***

- **Compiled a list of a species's trait values.** This produced a list of the value of a specific trait from every individual in a species. This was called in the ``highest_average()`` method.

~~~python
def compile_list(species, trait):
    trait_list = [] #list to be returned
    for individual in species: #cycling through every individual in a species
        trait_list.append(float(individual[trait])) #convert to float, add trait this individual to trait_list
    return trait_list
~~~

- **Took the highest average value for one trait.** This is method that produced the answer for problem at hand—which species had the greatest average value for a given trait. However, as previously mentioned, I wrote this method so that it would work for any trait. Additionally, I included the option to return or print the value or both.

~~~python
def highest_average(trait_dict, trait, print_it: bool, ret: bool): ###RETURN OR PRINT THE HIGHEST AVERAGE VALUE OF AN TRAIT ACROSS SPECIES###
    for species in all_species: #go through every species
        species_name = species[0]["species"] #set a temporary variable for the name of the species
        trait_dict[species_name] = average(compile_list(species, trait)) #create a dictionary entry for the species: the species's name is the key and its value is average of a particular trait in this species

    sorted_traits = dict(sorted(trait_dict.items(), key=lambda item: item[1], reverse = True)) #sort

    trait_species = list(sorted_traits.keys())[0] #take the species of the greatest average trait value
    trait_val = str(round(list(sorted_traits.values())[0], 2)) #take a string of the rounded greatest average trait value

    if print_it == True:
        print_highest(trait_species, trait_val, trait)
    else:
        return trait_species, trait_val
~~~

***Finally, my simple tasks methods included:***

- **Averaging a list.** This was a simple operation that was large enough to merit a separate method.

~~~python
def average(list):
    j = 0
    for i in list:
        j += i
    return (j / len(list))
~~~

- **Printing a report on the data.** This, too, did not quite belong in the ``highest_average()`` method as I wanted to keep the option of simply returning the highest average trait open.

~~~python
def print_highest(species, val, trait):
    return "The species with the greatest " + trait + " is " + species + " (averaging at " + val + "mm)." #turn it into a string
~~~

## Conclusion

### Final notes

In this lab, I learned how writing versatile code, while it might require some more thinking and organization, really pays off—in terms of time and understanding. By forcing myself to think abstractly about this lab and datasets in general, I gained a fundamental understanding of what exactly I was doing to complete the project. I have every intention to continue writing code in this way, while exercising good judgement as to make sure that I am needlessly adding versatility; this is all to say, it possible to waste time writing needless features into code that need not be so complicated.

### Muffin recipe

Considering the name of my analytics website is מאַפאַן מענטש אַנאַליטיק (_Maffan Mensch Analytik_—that is, "Muffin Man Analytics" in Yiddish), I realized that it would be morally wrong if I don't add muffin-related content to each one of my posts. On weeks that I bake muffins—that is to say, most weeks—I will post a muffin recipe if it's good enough. If you, my readers, end up making the recipe (which you totally should—muffins are like quick and easy cakes for breakfast), please send a picture of them along! Happy baking—or as we say in Yiddish, _tsufridn bakn!_!

[Here is the recipe](https://addapinch.com/cinnamon-apple-muffins-recipe/) I used this week—they were gone in two days! Don't bother making the sauce (it's gross, in my humble opinion) and dust the muffins with sugar before you put them in the oven!

_Tsufridenem bakn!_
